---
permalink: /
title: "Academic Pages is a ready-to-fork GitHub Pages template for academic personal websites"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

This is the front page of a website that is powered by the [Academic Pages template](https://github.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io) and hosted on GitHub pages. [GitHub pages](https://pages.github.com) is a free service in which websites are built and hosted from code and data stored in a GitHub repository, automatically updating when a new commit is made to the repository. This template was forked from the [Minimal Mistakes Jekyll Theme](https://mmistakes.github.io/minimal-mistakes/) created by Michael Rose, and then extended to support the kinds of content that academics have: publications, talks, teaching, a portfolio, blog posts, and a dynamically-generated CV. Incidentally, these same features make it a great template for anyone that needs to show off a professional template!

 You can fork [this template](https://github.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io) right now, modify the configuration and Markdown files, add your own PDFs and other content, and have your own site for free, with no ads!

About me
======
Hi! I'm Srishti and I'm a senior majoring in physics at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. This summer I had the opportunity to work with Professor Suzan vanderLee on inferring strain of the lithosphere of Mars with recordings of marsquakes from the SEIS mission on the Mars InSight lander. I have many hobbies, but I especially love to do crafts like origami or making friendship bracelets


Abstract
======
We know far less about Mars’ tectonics than we do about Earth’s. Most earthquakes are caused by plate tectonics. However, Mars does not have plate tectonics. Data from the SEIS experiment on the Mars InSight mission shows that quakes, nonetheless, occur on Mars, called marsquakes. We apply a series of rotations to these data for low-frequency marsquakes taken to measure the amplitudes of the P, SV, and SH waves to infer the faulting mechanisms within the lithosphere of Mars.

Background
------
Earth's crust is broken up into several plates, which move in opposite directions from one another at faults. This process creates tension in the Earth's crust, and eventually, strain starts to build up. When the energy from this strain is released, an earthquake occurs. Earthquakes produce two kinds of waves: P-waves, S-waves, and many reflections, refractions, and combinations of the two, resulting in Rayleigh waves. P-waves are longitudinal and relatively fast, while S-waves are transverse and relatively slow, so the P-waves reach the detector before the S-waves or any other seismic waves do. Measuring the amplitudes of the P-waves and S-waves generated by Earthquakes provides us with information that allows us to constrain aspects of the quakes' mechanisms, such as the orientation of the principal axis with the largest stress. These aspects, in turn, provide information about the Earth's tectonics. These quakes are not unique to Earth; they also occur on Mars. Mars does not have active plate tectonics, as its outer layer cooled rapidly during its formation (\cite{Sita2022}). The Mars InSight lander landed on Mars in 2018 and detected its first marsquake in 2019. Since then, it has recorded many more, and analysis of this data can provide information that allows us to learn more about the interior structure of Mars. The detector measures the origin time of the marsquake, the arrival times of the P- and S-wave, the back azimuth, and the distance to the epicenter from the detector, among others. We used the name named data fields in our analyses.  

Methods
------
This project largely follows the methods of a previous REU student, Madelyn Sita, who analyzed 3 specific low-frequency/broadband marsquakes. The eventual goal is to measure 3 amplitudes: the P-, SH-, and SV-wave amplitude. The H and V in SH snd SV represent the horizontal and vertical components of the S-wave. To accomplish these measurements, we isolate each component into its own component by rotating the data through 4 stages via different angles. Data is measured through 3 channels built into the detector: BHU (U), BHV (V), and BHW (W) (UWV). These channels are almost orthogonal to each other, but are spaced 120 degrees apart in space. This raw data is then rotated so that one channel points north, one points east, and one points in the Z direction. These channels are aptly named BHN (N), BHE (E), and BHZ (Z) (ENZ), respectively. At this point in the process, the data is still very noisy, so we applied bandpass filtering with various frequency bands and selected the lowest frequency band that still has discernible data. Below is a visualization of the bands used in filtering in Figure 1. Marsquake S1133c is used in this note to demonstrate the method, but the same process can be used for any low-frequency or broadband marsquakes.


At this point, we are still not able to determine the individual amplitudes of the P-waves and S-waves since the they are still interfering with each other. To isolate them further, the data is then rotated about the Z component using the back azimuth angle, the angle between the detector and the marsquake, so that the N and E components become the R and T components. The R, T, and Z components are orthogonal to the marsquake. Since the s-wave is transverse, it contains both a vertical and horizontal component, which we call the SV and SH waves, respectively. The amplitude of the SV wave is measured on the T component. The data is then rotated about the T component using the incidence angles, the angle at which the waves arrive at the detector. The R and Z components are rotated to Q and L. The amplitude of the P-wave is measured on the L component, and the amplitude of the SH wave is measured on the SH component. This last rotation must be done two separate times - once using the incidence angle of the p-wave and a second time using the incidence angle of the s-wave. A diagram of the rotations is shown in Figure 2.



In Figure 3, the data are shown after each rotation for Marsquake S1133c. S1133c is almost directly east of the lander, so it makes sense that the R component looks like the inverse of the E component.%




Results
------
Amplitude measurements for marsquake S1133c are listed below and plots of the L, Q, and T components are shown in Figure 4.





The eventual goal is to measure these amplitudes for all low-frequency or broadband marsquakes. Not all of these marsquakes have listed back azimuths, distances, or arrival times for the P- and S-waves, so many amplitudes cannot be measured. For the measurable quakes, however, the aim is to make beach ball plots such as the one shown in Figure 5.





These beach ball plots give us insight into the faulting mechanisms of the marsquake being looked at. By examining more marsquakes, we can learn more about the tectonics of mars and possibly the interior structure.




Discussion
------
These results show that there are many different focal mechanisms in a small area, which matches previous analyses. Work can be done to constrain uncertainties in location or plots such as using the depth phases obtaiend from the beach ball plots to make sure derived faulting mechanisms are correct.

References
------
1. 
Contact
------
Email: srishti8@illinois.edu
